---
outline: deep
---

<!-- @format -->

# What is Vay.js?

Vay.js is an innovative internationalization (i18n) provider library designed to simplify the process of adding translations and localizations to your web projects. With an emphasis on developer experience, Vay.js offers a robust yet straightforward API that makes managing multiple languages in your application effortless.

Whether you're building a small project or a large-scale web application, Vay.js enables you to bring your content to a global audience, ensuring that language is no barrier to user engagement.

::: tip
Itching to translate something? Skip to the [Getting Started](./02.getting-started.md) part.
:::

## Key Features

- **Effortless Integration**: Quick setup and integration with existing projects.
- **Dynamic Localization**: Real-time translation and content adaptation based on user preferences.
- **No dependencies, no Vendor specificity**: Vay is dependency free, and can be used in any framework of your choice.
- **Contextual Translations & Pluralizations**: Advanced handling of contextual information and plural forms to ensure accurate and relevant translations.
- **Developer-Friendly API**: A clean and intuitive API that simplifies the translation process, saving you time and effort.

## Navigating the Documentation

This documentation is designed to be your comprehensive guide to using Vay.js effectively. Whether you're just starting out or looking to dive deep into the library's capabilities, you'll find detailed explanations, examples, and best practices to help you on your journey. Here's how to navigate our documentation:

### Getting Started

The [Getting Started](./02.getting-started.md) page is your first step to using Vay.js. It covers the basics of installing the library, setting up your first translation dictionary, and integrating Vay.js into your project. This section is perfect for new users who want to quickly get up and running.

### Core Concepts

To build a solid foundation, dive deeper. The documentation explains the fundamental principles of internationalization and how Vay.js approaches [language management](./03.configuration.md), [dictionaries](./04.dictionaries.md), and [translations](./05.translating.md). Understanding these concepts will help you make the most of Vay.js's features.

### API Reference

For a detailed look at all the functions and configurations Vay.js offers, the [API Reference](./09.api-reference.md) is the place to go. Here, you'll find comprehensive documentation on the library's API, including how to use the translate function, manage languages, and configure your translation provider.

## Join the Community

Vay.js is more than just a library; it's a community of developers passionate about making the web more accessible and inclusive. Join us on GitHub to contribute, share your experiences, and get support from users.

Thank you for choosing Vay.js for your internationalization needs. We're excited to support you in creating applications that speak to users around the globe.
