---
outline: deep
---

<!-- @format -->

# Getting Started

## Try Vay in the Browser

You can try out Vay in the browser without ever opening your editor on [StackBlitz](https://stackblitz.com/edit/vay-js).

## Installation

You can install Vay using your favourite package manager. Vay provides `commonjs` as well as `esm` exports to achieve compatibility with all node setups.

::: code-group

```sh [yarn]
# Install Vay via yarn add
$ yarn add @vayjs/vay
```

```sh [npm]
# Install Vay via npm install
$ npm install @vayjs/vay
```

```sh [pnpm]
# Install Vay via pnpm add
$ pnpm add @vayjs/vay
```

```sh [bun ]
# Install Vay using bun add
$ bun add @vayjs/vay
```

:::

::: info

You can also use Vay using the [unpkg CDN](https://unpkg.com) directly in the browser when not using a bundler. See the [Translating Static Pages with Vay](../recipes/translating-static-pages.md) recipe for more information.

:::

## The `VayProvider`

To translate a token and retrieve the corresponding phrase, you need to create a `VayProvider` using the `createProvider` function. The function requires a config object and at least one dictionary.

> All examples in the documentation will be utilising TypeScript and ESM inside the example code blocks.

::: code-group

```ts [src/i18n.provider.ts]
import { createProvider, defineConfig, defineDictionary } from '@vayjs/vay';

// Create the i18n provider
const i18n = createProvider(
    // Create the Vay config
    defineConfig({ defaultLocale: 'en' }),
    // Pass your dictionaries to the instance. You can pass as
    // many dictionaries as you like.
    defineDictionary('en', {
        token: 'Phrase',
    }),
    defineDictionary('es', {
        token: 'Expresión',
    }),
);

// Use the created provider
console.log(i18n.translate('token')); // Outputs 'Phrase'

// Set a different language
i18n.setLanguage('es');

// Get the current language
console.log(i18n.getLanguage()); // Outputs 'es'
```

:::

::: tip
Read more about `tokens`, `phrases` and `dictionaries` in the [dictionaries](./04.dictionaries.md) section. To learn more about how to configure Vay, take a look at the [configuration](./03.configuration.md) section.
:::

## What's Next?

Great job on getting Vay.js up and running! Let's keep the momentum going. Here are a few suggestions to take your project's i18n capabilities further:

- Enhance Your Dictionaries: Dive into the [Dictionaries](./04.dictionaries.md) guide. Learn to craft dictionaries that grow with your project and support complex translation scenarios.

- Explore Configuration: Customize Vay.js to fit your needs. Our [Configuration](./03.configuration.md) page offers insights into fine-tuning your setup, such as adjusting the default locale or tweaking interpolation settings.

- Try out [Interpolation](./06.interpolation.md): Dynamic data in your translations can make a world of difference. Check out how to dynamically insert data into your translations for more personalized content.
