---
outline: deep
---

<!-- @format -->

# Dictionaries

Dictionaries in Vay are foundational to the library's approach to internationalization, providing the mappings between `tokens` and their `phrases` in various languages.

## Token & Phrases

A `dictionary` consists of `tokens` and `phrases`, where each token can be mapped to a corresponding phrase. A token is a textual representation of the translation path, eg. `this.is.a.nested.token`, for a deeply nested dictionary. This is similar (but not equal) to the dot notation you would use to access the dictionaries content. A phrase can be either a string, a function returning a string, a object containing numbers as keys and strings as values, or a object containing more phrases. The type for a Phrase looks like this:

```ts
export type Phrase =
    | string
    | (ctx: any) => string
    | ({
          [key: string]: Phrase;
      } & {
          [key: number]: string;
      });
```

While a simple textual phrase consists of a key-value pair, contextualisation as well as pluralization can make your dictionary more complex. In Vay, dictionaries are usually typescript files.

::: tip
As long as you do not use contextual phrases, you can also use JSON files and import them into your TypeScript. See more in the [Using JSON dictionaries](../recipes/using-JSON-for-dictionaries.md) recipe.
:::

## Creating a Dictionary

To create a dictionary, use the `defineDictionary` function. This function takes two parameters: a locale and an object containing your translations. The locale should be a valid ISO 639 language code, and the translations object should map tokens to their respective strings or functions for dynamic translations.

::: code-group

```ts [src/i18n.dictionary.en.ts]
// Define a English dictionary
const en = defineDictionary('en', {
    hello: 'Hello',
    goodbye: 'Goodbye',
});
```

```ts [src/i18n.dictionary.es.ts]
// Define a English dictionary
const es = defineDictionary('es', {
    hello: 'Hola',
    goodbye: 'Adiós',
});
```

:::

::: info
Read more about complex dictionaries in the [interpolation](./06.interpolation.md), [pluralization](./07.pluralization.md) and [context](./08.context.md) section of the documentation.
:::

## Integrating Dictionaries

After defining your dictionaries, pass them to your VayProvider during initialization. This makes all the translations available for use throughout your application.

::: code-group

```ts [src/i18n.provider.ts]
import { createProvider, defineConfig } from '@vayjs/vay';
import { en } from './18n.dictionary.en';
import { es } from './18n.dictionary.es';

export const i18n = createProvider(
    defineConfig({ defaultLocale: 'en' }),
    // Add your dictionaries here
    en,
    es,
);
```

```ts [src/i18n.dictionary.en.ts]
import { defineDictionary } from '@vayjs/vay';

// Define a English dictionary
export const en = defineDictionary('en', {
    hello: 'Hello',
    goodbye: 'Goodbye',
});
```

```ts [src/i18n.dictionary.es.ts]
import { defineDictionary } from '@vayjs/vay';

// Define a English dictionary
export const es = defineDictionary('es', {
    hello: 'Hola',
    goodbye: 'Adiós',
});
```

:::

Dictionaries are a powerful aspect of Vay, enabling you to manage translations effectively across multiple languages. By following these guidelines and leveraging the `defineDictionary` function, you can create a versatile and comprehensive internationalization solution for your applications.
